Doing configuration in actual Java code has been around for a while now,
but can still be a newer paradigm shift for many Java developers.
This concept would be equivalent to metaprogramming and many of the
scripted languages today with the exception of DSL,
or domain-specific language customizations.
I like to lump all of my Java configuration together in a single package,
so I'm going to go ahead and create a new package next to the
controllers or a sibling to the controllers called config.
I can now place all of my Java configuration in here and
isolate it and know where it's all at.
So first, I'm going to create a new Java class,
and I'm going to call it PersistenceConfiguration.
This configuration class can be used to customize and create
changes or configuration in our persistence tier.
Spring needs to know that this is a configuration class,
so we need to annotate it as such.
Naming it Configuration is not enough,
so we'll add an @Configuration annotation and import that.
Now here's kind of the strange part,
any methods that we define in here can return bean definitions
that will get stored in the Spring context.
I'm going to show you how to override the data source being
provided by the Spring Data JPA starter.
We need to first begin with a new method definition on our class,
and that will look like this.
The return type of this method will be a javax.sql data source.
When this method returns the DataSource object,
Spring looks for it and tries to see if one already
exists in the Spring context.
If it does, it will replace its definition with the one that it found.
Spring will need to know that this is a Spring bean,
so we need to annotate the method as such.
We could do that by adding the @Bean annotation and importing that.
We can now provide any kind of Java code to build or
implement this object however we want.
The body of the method is where the configuration
actually happens in a Java Config class,
so I'm going to add the basic builder to the method by doing this.
We'll first create a DataSource builder, and I'll import that.
That's following the builder pattern, and it creates a new DataSourceBuilder.
Next, I set the URL on there, which is like this.
A side note,
that URL is the same URL that we had in our application.property file.
And then finally,
we ask the builder to go ahead and build our DataSource and return it,
which since we specified this is a bean,
Spring will look for that bean in the Spring context and replace the
DataSource definition with what we've implemented here.
Now to prove that this is not just smoke and mirrors,
I'm going to add a system.out into the method so that we can
look for that on application startup so that we know that our
bean definition got created.
So before the return method, I simply have a System.out .println,
which says, My custom datasource bean has been initialized and set.
We'll want to look for this in the log startup.
So we'll save the file, and let's go ahead and restart our application.
So Tomcat has reported that it started on port 5000.
That means our application is running.
We can now scroll up and look for our message.
And here's the message that the app set up in the
custom Java configuration class.
You might be thinking, why would we want to do this?
Well, if you have to do something complex,
like maybe you want to log something,
maybe you want to send an email when a transaction is committed,
or maybe you want to set up two-phase transactions or transactions across,
say, a Mongo database and a relational database,
you can set up anything you need to do inside of
your Java Configuration classes.
The more you've worked with these Configuration classes,
the more you'll be able to get ideas and see ways
that you can utilize this feature.
It's certainly worth the time to get transitioned over to this paradigm.
We're just about done exploring the world of configuration in Spring Boot, but there is one last concept, and that is creating your own auto configuration.